# Commands-Collection v1.1alpha

Welcome to the first alpha release of Commands-Collection!

(I do wonder why 1.1 though, yes I'm the maker of this project)

For short, call Commands-Collection CC. And we will use that name from now on.

## Features

### Eye-candy:3

(not really)

Colors are now used widely in CC. For logging. For `--help`. For errors. For informations.

`dir` now lets you create different arrangement of columns, different string/character for each file type. Presets for CC's own layout, GNU's `ls` and Windows's `dir` are still present and can be set using `DIR_PRESET` environment variable. Sadly it doesn't color names right now, as it's not easy to implement.

### Localizations

It's finally coming. And the best? No *dependencies* (for runtime).

CC supports localizations from whatever path, by modifying `CC_I18N_LOC` environment variable.

For you maintainers, `gettext` is required to generate files. Installing is easy: either via your OS's package manager OR XMake's XRepo:

```bash
$ xrepo install gettext
```

Targets for generating `.po` and `.mo` files have been added to `xmake.lua`.

### Regular expressions!

Or regex for short.

The feature has been implemented and is available to be used widely within CC. `dir` is the first program that uses this thing - check it out!

### Manual pages

Man(ual) pages for CC itself and its programs are available in section 1, 5 and 7. Nothing much to say so...try it out yourself! Look for ones whose name start with `cc-`.

### Paged output

Do you like to use `head` everytime to get first 5 lines of `--help`? Probably not.

Long outputs can sometime be frustating, and pagers like `less` and `more` are made to help. But do you like to use them anytime to scroll the output?

Probably not.

That's why `cc.pager` is here, which is used by default for `--help` output!

Features:
* Jump to line
* Search
* Mark
* Copy
* Scrollable (of course)

## For developers

### Build system changes

Make is no longer used, along with Makefile.fpc. FPMake was used as an attempt to replace Make, but later got removed. Instead, we now use this not-so-new thing: [XMake](https://xmake.io).

It uses Lua. It runs fine on many platforms. It *let* you cross-compile (I wonder if it supports FPC though). It supports FPC!

All compilation flags required for CC have been put on a separate file for easy access.

Sometimes you want to a different unit path, compile option, or even a different compiler. You can tell XMake where your `fpc.cfg` is:

```bash
$ xmake f --fpc-conf=<path>
$ xmake # Build as usual
```

You can tell XMake to append a prefix to each program names:

```bash
$ xmake f --output-prefix=<whatever>
$ xmake
```

To build a specific program / target:

```bash
$ xmake b -h # Get possible targets and more
$ xmake b <target>
```

### API changes

#### Modified argument parser

RTL's `getopts` has been heavily modified for:
* Localizations;
* Quick non-option array population;
* Automatically print help messages **and** quit on errors;
* Removal of unneeded things (`OptErr`, `TOption.Flag`, `TOption.SetOption`);
* Renames;
* Comply with CC's coding rules;
* Some other small optimizations.

CC's `custcustapp` has been merged with this `getopts`.

#### New APIs

```pascal
uses cc.base;

type
    T = record
        ...
    end;

    TError = record
        Message: string;
    end;

var r: specialize TResult<T, TError>;
try
    r := specialize TResult<T, TError>.Ok(do_something);
except on E: TError do
    r := specialize TResult<T, TError>.Err(E);
end;

...

writeln(specialize IfThenElse<string>(
    r.IsOK, 'OK', r.GetError.Message
));

var arr: array of int = (1, 2, 3, 4, 5);
specialize ArrayForEach<int>(
    arr, writeln
);

var opt: specialize TOptional<string>;
opt.Value := do_something_nullable;
writeln(specialize IfThenElse<string>(
    opt.HasValue, 'Yes', 'No'
));
```

#### Miscs

* CC's API are now prefixed with `cc.`;
* The `utils` unit has been splitted into separate `fs` and `regex` units;
* Escape sequences for terminal colors are now compiler definitions for easy and quick `{$include}`s;
* APIs are now documented;
* Implemented console manipulation units (`console` and `pager`).
