# Commands-Collection v262305a

Welcome to the first alpha release of Commands-Collection!
Years have been passed, and the first release is out, with a lot of changes, experiments, fails and optimizations comparing with the last commit from 2024!

For short, call Commands-Collection CC. And we will use that name from now on.

## New features

### Eye-candy:3

Colors are now used more widely in CC. For informations, errors, and more.

`dir` now has 3 different presets with different column arrangements, time formats, and such.

### Localizations

It's finally coming. And the best? No runtime *dependencies*.

CC supports localizations from whatever path, by modifying `CC_I18N_LOC` environment variable.

For you maintainers, `gettext` is required to generate files.
Targets for generating `.po` and `.mo` files have been added to `xmake.lua`, having `-i18n` suffix in their name.

### Manual pages

Man(ual) pages for CC itself and its programs are available in section 1, 5 and 7. Nothing much to say so...try it out yourself! Look for ones whose name start with `cc-`.

### Program-specific changes

0. New/removed/merged programs
    - Merged rmdir and rm into rm
    - Merged touch and mkdir into touch
    - Removed cat
    - Removed printf
    - Removed rename
    - Added uname
1. dir
    - New layout presets
    - Able to ignore specific names using regular expressions
    - Able to get file permissions
    - Support more file types?
    - Able to recursively read folders
2. env
    - Using -- flag will make env treat everything after that arguments for the program it'll launch (if any)
    - Able to launch programs with empty environment
3. inp
    - Change of long flag names
4. rm
    - Able to ask user for confirmations
    - Able to ignore / delete specific names using regular expressions
    - Able to not delete anything (-d / --dry-run)
    - Able to delete recursively
    - Able to ignore errors
5. touch
    - Able to create file **and** folders in one call
    - Able to only create folders
    - Able to ignore errors

## For developers

### Build system changes

Make is no longer used. Experiments with FPMake were made.
But in the end, [XMake](https://xmake.io) is the choosen one.

Being powered by Lua, XMake lets you do a lot of things with ease.

### API changes

#### New but old, old but new argument parser

RTL's `getopts` has been heavily modified for:
* Localizations;
* Quick non-option array population;
* Automatically print help messages **and** quit on errors;
* Removal of unneeded things (`OptErr`, `TOption.Flag`, `TOption.SetOption`);
* Renames;
* New features.

CC's `custcustapp` has been removed in favor of this new unit.

#### New APIs

262305 introduces a set of APIs for a better developing experience:

```pascal
uses cc.base;

type
    T = record
        ...
    end;

    TError = record
        Message: string;
    end;

var r: specialize TResult<T, TError>;
try
    r := specialize TResult<T, TError>.Ok(do_something);
except on E: TError do
    r := specialize TResult<T, TError>.Err(E);
end;

...

{$modeswitch anonymousfunctions}
{$modeswitch result}

writeln(specialize IfThenElse<string>(
    r.IsOK, 'OK', r.GetError.Message
));

var arr: array of int = (1, 2, 3, 4, 5);
specialize ArrayForEach<int>(arr,
    fn(num: int): bool
    begin
        writeln(IntToStr(num));
        return(false); // let the loop continue
    end
);

var opt: specialize TOptional<string>;
opt.Value := do_something_nullable;
writeln(specialize IfThenElse<string>(
    opt.HasValue, 'Yes', 'No'
));
```

This includes:
* Rust's TResult and TOptional;
* Generics for arrays;
* Regex;
* File system tasks;
* Console modifiers.

Many are documented.
