.TH INP1 "2025-10-26" "Commands-collection" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
inp \- prompt for a key or input and exit with its character code
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B inp
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBinp\fR displays a message and waits for a key or input. The program exits with the ASCII value of the entered character (or a non-zero code if input is unexpected).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB-c, --message \fR \fIMESSAGE\fR
Set a custom message to display.
.TP
\fB-d, --hide-input\fR
Do not echo the keyboard input as it is typed. Characters will not be shown or replaced by placeholders such as "*".
.TP
\fB-e, --need-enter\fR
Require the Enter key after the input character. Use this when you need an explicit confirmation step from the user; it can be combined with other options (for example, prompting for a key and then requiring Enter to verify).
.TP
\fB-k, --key \fR \fICHARACTER/STRING\fR
Specify accepted key(s). Can be used multiple times.
.TP
\fB-l, --loop\fR
Keep prompting until an accepted key is pressed.
.TP
\fB-o, --show-availables\fR
Show the available accepted keys in the prompt.
.TP
\fB-s, --case-sensitive\fR
Make key matching case-sensitive.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Prompt with a custom message and accept only 'y' or 'n':
.RS
.nf
$ inp -c "Continue?" -k y -k n
Continue? [yn] y
$
.fi
.RE
.TP
Hide input while the user types (useful for passwords or sensitive keys). Note: characters are not echoed or replaced by stars:
.RS
.nf
$ inp -d -c "Enter PIN:"
# Prompt appears; typed characters are not shown
$
.fi
.RE
.TP
Require the user to press Enter after the key (useful when you want an explicit verification step):
.RS
.nf
$ inp -e -k q
Press Enter after q
$
.fi
.RE
.TP
Keep prompting until one of the accepted keys is pressed (example transcript showing repeated prompts):
.RS
.nf
$ inp -l -k y -k n -o -c "Are you sure?"
Are you sure? [yn] x
Are you sure? [yn] no
Are you sure? [yn] y
# exits with code for 'y'
$
.fi
.RE
.TP
Display available accepted keys in the prompt:
.RS
.nf
$ inp -o -k y -k n -c "Continue?"
Continue? [y] y
$
.fi
.RE
.SH AUTHOR
Commands-collection project
